Rewrite guidance about pact testing (#3498)
alphagov/govuk-developer-docs: source/manual/pact-broker.html.md

parent: "/manual.html"
---

[Pact](https://docs.pact.io/) is a tool we use for *contract testing*. Contract testing involves creating a set of tests that are shared between an API (the "provider") and its users ("consumers") using some kind of "broker". For example, the Publishing API has a "pact" or "contract" with GDS API Adapters:

- the expected interactions are defined in [the publishing_api_test.rb in gds-api-adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/blob/master/test/publishing_api_test.rb)
- when these tests are run they output a JSON pactfile which is published to [our pact broker](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-pact-broker) ([live site](https://pact-broker.cloudapps.digital/))
- the build of publishing api will use this pactfile to test the publishing-api service

> GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall. We have [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) that are used to test GDS API Adapters with each app - ensuring they are in sync. GDS API Adapters can then do "proper contract testing" on behalf of all the apps that use it.

Author: We're losing an important piece of the puzzle there. How about this:

> GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for testing real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall, which instead use [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) to make sure they stay in sync. GDS API Adapters then does the contract testing on behalf of all the apps that use it.

It may be this is still too terse: I'm trying to keep the intro concise as it's already quite wordy.

Does that read any better?

> GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall. We have [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) that are used to test GDS API Adapters with each app - ensuring they are in sync. GDS API Adapters can then do "proper contract testing" on behalf of all the apps that use it.

Reviewer: Hmm the bit I was missing was "in sync with [what]?". I think I get it now, e.g. [definition](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/blob/c2944f00b8de45b5c78b195807c055367da71630/lib/gds_api/test_helpers/worldwide.rb#L54) and [usage in app tests](https://github.com/alphagov/contacts-admin/blob/e935fa54bf71c0063bb92faeaf8a27d1618e00ee/spec/interactors/admin/clone_contact_spec.rb#L11).

Perhaps this?

```suggestion
GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall. It defines [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) that are used within each app's own tests (see [example stub](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/blob/c2944f00b8de45b5c78b195807c055367da71630/lib/gds_api/test_helpers/worldwide.rb#L54) being [used in an application](https://github.com/alphagov/contacts-admin/blob/e935fa54bf71c0063bb92faeaf8a27d1618e00ee/spec/interactors/admin/clone_contact_spec.rb#L11)). This ensures the apps are in sync with GDS API Adapters. GDS API Adapters then does contract testing on behalf of all the apps that use it.
```

> GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall. We have [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) that are used to test GDS API Adapters with each app - ensuring they are in sync. GDS API Adapters can then do "proper contract testing" on behalf of all the apps that use it.

Author: Thanks, that's helpful. I've tweaked it a bit here: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/3498/commits/fcc7cc5632cbd2984e573d2e6f02a307b2bee4c5.

Does it convey the two key points to you?

> GDS API Adapters is really a proxy for real "consumer" apps, like Whitehall. We have [a set of shared stubs](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/tree/master/lib/gds_api/test_helpers) that are used to test GDS API Adapters with each app - ensuring they are in sync. GDS API Adapters can then do "proper contract testing" on behalf of all the apps that use it.

Reviewer: Looks good :+1: thanks

env PACT_URI="../gds-api-adapters/spec/pacts/gds_api_adapters-bank_holidays_api.json" bundle exec rake pact:verify
```

## Adding tests for a new app

_If the app already had some Pact tests, follow [the steps for changing existing Pact tests](#changing-existing-pact-tests)._

1. Write the consumer and provider tests.
  - [Consumer example](https://github.com/alphagov/gds-api-adapters/pull/1066).
  - [Provider example](https://github.com/alphagov/imminence/pull/644).

1. Check the consumer tests pass locally.
  - CI won't do this for you yet because it doesn't know about the new app.

1. Merge the consumer tests for the new app.

>   - Warning: the build will pass because it runs with the old Jenkinsfile.

Author: That's true, I think that may be a relic.

I've removed it [here](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/3498/commits/74cae5e74081f10424c4b5d32a926042ff1adf0d) and actually think it's so low level we can leave it to the next point to explain.

## Changing existing Pact tests

Follow these steps in order to change the provider and consumer in tandem.

1. Make the change to the API (your provider, e.g. Imminence), in a branch.
  - Its build should fail at the Pact test stage, because it is testing against the default branch of the consumer.

1. Make the change to the pactfile in the consumer (e.g. GDS API Adapters), in a branch.
  - Its build should fail at the Pact test stage, because it is testing against the default branch of the provider.

1. Run a parameterised build of the consumer, specifying the new branch name of the provider to test against.

>   - The build should pass so you can now merge the PR, which will mean the change is on the default branch.

Author: Sure, I've added "consumer" in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/3498/commits/74cae5e74081f10424c4b5d32a926042ff1adf0d.

1. Re-run the build for the provider PR now the consumer is merged.

>   - The build should pass so you can now merge the PR.

Author: I've added "provider" in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-developer-docs/pull/3498/commits/74cae5e74081f10424c4b5d32a926042ff1adf0d 👍

1. Re-run the build for the provider PR now the consumer is merged.
  - The build should pass so you can now merge the PR.

## Special cases and tech debt

> Publishing API and Content Store have a direct pact, with [Publishing API acting as the consumer](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/tree/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/pacts/content_store) and [Content Store acting as the provider](https://github.com/alphagov/content-store/blob/de729dfe12e6e9da4a27a52259f59b9051e4da27/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L32). This can be confusing as [Publishing API is also a provider for GDS API Adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L20). It's unclear if the direct pact was intentional. In future we should consider changing Publishing API to use GDS API Adapters to talk to Content Store and have an indirect pact like we do for all other apps.

Author: Hmm...you make a fair point that my claim of "tech debt" is unsubstantiated (it's becoming a habit!). I think there is _some_ debt here: the inconsistency isn't necessarily an issue, but it's undocumented.

However, I also agree that this might be the preferred way of implementing one-to-one contract tests. Content Data takes a similar approach, but doesn't have any contract tests to make this more than a one-off.

I'm open to removing "and tech debt" and cutting from "It's unclear...". Just before I do, I'd like to ask @kevindew for a third opinion: does the current approach surprise you?

> Publishing API and Content Store have a direct pact, with [Publishing API acting as the consumer](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/tree/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/pacts/content_store) and [Content Store acting as the provider](https://github.com/alphagov/content-store/blob/de729dfe12e6e9da4a27a52259f59b9051e4da27/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L32). This can be confusing as [Publishing API is also a provider for GDS API Adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L20). It's unclear if the direct pact was intentional. In future we should consider changing Publishing API to use GDS API Adapters to talk to Content Store and have an indirect pact like we do for all other apps.

Author: For the sake of getting the bulk of this change in, I've cut the contentious part of this and created [a tech debt card](https://trello.com/c/GkIffOx8/232-publishing-api-contract-tests-are-different-to-all-other-repos) to discuss adding more guidance on this special case.

@ChrisBAshton just a final check: good to go?

> Publishing API and Content Store have a direct pact, with [Publishing API acting as the consumer](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/tree/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/pacts/content_store) and [Content Store acting as the provider](https://github.com/alphagov/content-store/blob/de729dfe12e6e9da4a27a52259f59b9051e4da27/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L32). This can be confusing as [Publishing API is also a provider for GDS API Adapters](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/dd8dd9232d3cbf33b8945fdd898ebe80d7dcfcf6/spec/service_consumers/pact_helper.rb#L20). It's unclear if the direct pact was intentional. In future we should consider changing Publishing API to use GDS API Adapters to talk to Content Store and have an indirect pact like we do for all other apps.

Reviewer: LGTM 👍
